Space story number 1084 coming in three, two, one.
This is the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to you by
this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
It seems each launch of the space shuttle ushers in a new phase in its expanding
role as America's prime space transportation system. The launch of 41G is no
exception. We recently talked with several of the mission's astronauts. First is
Bob Crippen, veteran of three shuttle missions and commander of 41G. 41Golf is
one of the science types of missions that NASA's doing. As you're well aware,
we're doing commercial science and DOD type flights. And this one is primarily
oriented toward science. It's an earth oriented mission. designed to look at the
earth in various wavelengths using the number of payloads that we have on board.
I think that's probably the main thing that the people of this planet stand to
directly benefit from space is the kinds of ways that we can look back from
space and see the earth. We can learn many things about it, and I feel very
proud to be a part of this mission because of that. We're doing some other
things that are very important. One of them is kind of an extension from my last
flight where we did the satellite repair. We're going to attempt to prove that
we can do satellite refueling. We have an orbital refueling system that is set
up to transfer hydrazine, a propellant, that's primarily used by satellites. The
ORS, ORS, for Orbital Refueling System, is an important test for a possible
future refueling of satellites in orbit. Here is David Leistema, mission
specialist. This is his first mission into space, and he is the astronaut
responsible for the oar's operation. Due to the thermodynamic natures of the
hydrazine as it's transferred on orbit, and because we are in zero-g and there
is no convection for heat transfer, there's some concern that you could get some
hot pockets in the fluid or in the gas on the other side of the bladders of the
tanks and cause some hot spots. And one thing that you definitely do not want to
do with hydrazine on orbit is to heat it up. It's a pretty explosive-type
mixture, so you carefully control the experiment to maintain the temperatures
well below 150 degrees Fahrenheit. And so we will do that transfer in a couple
stages, and we will gather data during that which will tell us how we will be
able to and how long it will probably take to refuel a satellite once we do it
on orbit. Another part of the oars testing will involve an EVA, or spacewalk,
with Leistema assisted by mission specialist Cathy Sullivan also on her first
mission. The primary purpose of the EVA is to go out to connect up the orbit
refueling system with a series of tools that are would be Representative of how
we would refuel satellites that are currently in orbit It's a series of tools
designed That to make connections with the satellite servicing valves that exist
today on satellites that are already in orbit and Part of the purpose of the
experiment is to show that we can actually refuel satellites that Make
connections in pump hydrazine or refuel satellites that are already in orbit and
also to prepare the way to learn the thermodynamics of how we would make a
connection, to design satellites that we designed them and built them starting
today for future satellites to make it considerably easier so that we wouldn't
have to connect up to a basic satellite servicing valve. We could design a new
valve and make satellites much more easy to refuel once we're on orbit. Because
the lifetime of a number of spacecraft is limited by their on-board fuel supply,
the ability to refuel spacecraft in orbit has real economic potential. There has
been some discussion about refueling a Landsat satellite that's up there now, a
Landsat D satellite, but there are no specific plans right now. What I mean is
that there's no mission planned right now to go up and refuel a satellite. What
we're proving on our flight, hopefully, is the feasibility of actually doing
such a thing. And once that's proved, then we might be able to go ahead and plan
to actually do such a thing.
This has been The Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to
you by this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Space Story No. 1085 coming in 3, 2, 1. From outer space to inner body space
science at work for you.
This is the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to you by
this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
We recently talked with Alfred E. Mann, chairman of Pacesetter Systems,
manufacturer of medical devices about their heart pacemaker. Mr. Mann describes
some devices which also use space developed technology. We have a device that
uses direct NASA technology in transducers where we use a capacitive transducer
to measure the pressure within the brain from a little, what we call a brain
pill, which is mounted against the dura, which is the tough skin that surrounds
the brain. And by putting this in contact, we're able to measure the pressure
within the dura, within the brain, and to do this all by radiofrequency
communication, so there's no tubes or no wires that come out of the head as has
been necessary in the past. This is very important in the treatment of things
like head trauma where someone has a concussion or something or where someone
has hydrocephalus where their brain does not adjust properly the pressure within
it. The brain pill is an important innovation for health because in these cases,
without detection and treatment, severe damage or even death can occur. Another
modern medical device which appears to have great potential is the PIMS. The
PIMS stands for Programmable and Plantable Medication System. This is a very
exciting device which has been supported by NASA and by the National Institutes
of Health that is a long lived device for infusion of drugs and for diabetes,
for example. The patient simply gets a syringe injection to fill the pump every
three months and he is able to control the insulin delivery within his body at
the moment by programming it, someday hopefully through use of a glucose sensor
to automatically control it. Hypertension, we are now working on something which
we call SAMs, which is a device which will be used in a closed-loose system for
automatic control of blood pressure, for refractory hypertensives, another
important application of the pump. Scientists are now looking at the use of
controlled infusion of medication for treatment of a wide variety of diseases.
So there are many, many applications of this product. We're very excited about
it. In addition to this, we've taken some of this technology and we're expanding
it into a hospital system, where it will be able to revolutionize the way
medications delivered within the hospital, obsoleting some of the current drug
delivery pump systems that are now used in hospitals, it's weighed some of them
as much as 16 pounds, and ours will weigh only a few ounces and will perform
feats far beyond what these older systems will do. These are just some of the
applications that have been fostered by the Technology Utilization Program at
NASA and more importantly by the technology of NASA itself that has been
fostered from NASA's development programs. NASA Technology has made this entire
field possible through the contributions that it has made in advancing the
technology related to semiconductors, integrated circuits, quality control
procedures, reliability assessments, many of the manufacturing techniques and
the technology spin-offs into medicine have been very significant.
This has been the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to
you by this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Space story number 1086 coming in 3, 2, 1.
This is the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to you by
this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
For many years, NASA has been looking at the possibility of flying ordinary
citizens into space. That time has now come. the president recently announced
that a teacher would be the first selected for NASA's spaceflight participant
program. An elementary or secondary school teacher was chosen because of their
ability to effectively communicate their knowledge to large groups of students.
It is believed that this is an important time in the nation's history to
encourage our youth in the study of science and mathematics. Patrick Templeton,
associate administrator for External Relations at NASA Headquarters describes
the program. If this country is going to stay ahead in the world, stay ahead in
new technology development, stay ahead in industry, and new product
developments, then we have to be very well versed in high technology. This
emphasis now on science, math, engineering, and problem solving is very, very
important. The space program and the flying of a teacher can help bring that a
little closer to home and bringing it into the classroom, I think, by flying a
teacher and by bringing that awareness into the elementary and secondary school
levels. Because if we don't graduate more people, more youngsters in the future
who have this this capability, than our friends in foreign countries who are
emphasizing these kinds of studies will get ahead of us. And the new jobs that
will be created in the future, more of those will be created abroad than are
created here, and the jobs for our children and their children will not be as
many as we would like and as we should have to maintain our standard of living.
An announcement of opportunity released in October lists the specific
qualifications and requirements for applicants. said, that process, application
process will probably run through January. We are in the process now of
selecting a procedure to evaluate the applications and we hope that we'll be
through that process in time to bring the 100 or so finalists – two from from
each state and the territories and so forth, to the Johnson Space Center for a
workshop for about a week, and then coming back and selecting, out of those 100,
110 semi-finalists, 10 finalists, we will be taking that down to five and then
selecting a primary and a backup, and those two, we'll go through an eight-week
training at the Johnson Space Center to prepare them for flight. The teachers
selected will not have to be young or even above average in health or strength.
They will go through some of the training that the astronauts go through,
obviously, so that they're used to the zero-gravity environment and they know
how to get in and out of the space shuttle and what to do in the event of an
emergency and a familiarization process with what it's like to fly in space,
getting into the simulator, and those kinds of things. It's not a very difficult
training session, but it's thorough. The health requirements are not terribly
stringent. The eyesight requirements and the hearing requirements and the blood
pressure are not difficult at all, but that person must be able to make use of
the evacuation procedures if necessary. In the future, the spaceflight
participant program will be choosing persons from many other walks of life, such
as journalists, poets, artists, and just plain citizens. Keep yourself in good
health, and you, too, may be selected.
This has been a weekly Space and Aeronautics report brought to you by this
station and NASA, The National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Space Story Number 1087, coming in 3, 2, 1.
This is the Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to you by
this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
It may be faddish, but it's a trend that doctors and those concerned with health
applaud. It's exercise. People of all ages are getting into it, and especially
older persons concerned about the condition of their heart. In space, NASA
doctors have had similar concerns. The stress of launch and the unknown
environment of weightlessness have created a need to observe and record such
things as astronaut heart rates. In order to do this in space, new techniques
and equipment had to be developed, some of it just in time for our new national
consciousness of health. Here to discuss several of their new health products is
Dick Sharnytsky, President of Heart Rate Incorporated. One is a heart rate
monitor that is used to monitor the heart rate of people that are working out in
health clubs, gymnasiums, to determine whether their heart rate is at its proper
training level. The sensors that are used in this heart rate monitor came from
NASA, and that's the reason that we're at this technology utilization conference
is to show how NASA has helped us with this product. The other product that we
have is called a VersaClimber. It is a full body exercise machine. You
essentially climb on this device. You stand on two foot pedals, and you hold on
the two hand grips, and your arms and legs are oscillating in a climbing motion
as if you were climbing a ladder. It's a very high-level exercise activity. So,
basically then, with the aerobic exercise on the VersaClimber and the heart rate
monitor to determine which level you're at. It makes a complementary combination
of the products. NASA has an ongoing program to help businesses large and small
find application for NASA developed technology. Data bank centers located
throughout the nation are a good example. One such center is called the Westrack
facility. Through the Westrack facility at the University of Southern
California, we found a patent that NASA had on an ECG, or biomedical sensor, and
we were looking for a sensor that would accomplish some tasks that present
technology would not accomplish. And when we found this patent in the USC data
bank, we then contacted NASA, and they supplied us with a license on that
sensor. And the sensor is what you see in this unit. It allows us to pick up
these biomedical signals and do a much better job than other products. Often one
product leads to another. The heart rate monitor is no exception. There are a
number of other products which will eventually be developed, either by ourselves
or in conjunction with other companies, to utilize this new technology. And
those include stress testing. This product can be miniaturized and put in a
heart rate wristwatch so that you can wear the device on your wrist so that a
jogger, for instance, might use it. It can be used in Holter Monitoring, which
is a method of... You essentially carry a tape recorder around on your body, and
the sensors are picking up your ECG activity on a continuous basis. Then when
you go back to the doctor's office, it's analyzed diagnostically to determine
your condition. Another future application could be an ECG screening. That is
where you're being screened on maybe a two- to three-minute hookup to determine
roughly the condition of your cardiovascular system. Right now, the way that's
normally done is they use disposable electrodes. Three disposable electrodes are
attached to a person. They cost about a dollar and a half, and within three
minutes, they're thrown away. So that every three minutes, it's costing
approximately a dollar and a half. In this case, these are permanent sensors.
You use them and reuse them, so that in screening, you can see that at the end
of a day, you can save a considerable number of dollars in not having used all
of these disposable sensors.
This has been The Space Story, a weekly space and aeronautics report brought to
you by this station and NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.